Project Gutenberg's Preserving Louisiana's Legacy, by Nancy W. Dawkins

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll
have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using
this ebook.



Title: Preserving Louisiana's Legacy
       Everyone Can Help

Author: Nancy W. Dawkins

Release Date: May 26, 2020 [EBook #62235]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PRESERVING LOUISIANA'S LEGACY ***




Produced by Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net






             Department of Culture, Recreation and Tourism
       Louisiana Archaeological Survey and Antiquities Commission
                      Anthropological Study No. 5




                     PRESERVING LOUISIANA’S LEGACY


    [Illustration: A preserved Indian mound in Pointe Coupee Parish is
    surrounded by pasture and covered with vegetation.]

                               April 1982
                         Baton Rouge, Louisiana




                           STATE OF LOUISIANA


                             David C. Treen
                               _Governor_

             DEPARTMENT OF CULTURE, RECREATION AND TOURISM

                          Mrs. Lawrence H. Fox
                              _Secretary_

            ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY AND ANTIQUITIES COMMISSION

                          _Ex-Officio Members_

  Dr. Kathleen M. Byrd                              _State Archaeologist_
  Mr. Robert B. DeBlieux         _Assistant Secretary_, Office of Program
                                                              Development
  Mr. Frank P. Simoneaux     _Secretary_, Department of Natural Resources
  Mr. Linton Ardoin        _Secretary_, Department of Urban and Community
                                                                  Affairs

                          _Appointed Members_

                           Mr. William Baker
                          Mr. Fred Benton, Jr.
                             Mr. Brian Duhe
                        Dr. Lorraine Heartfield
                          Mr. Robert W. Neuman
                          Mrs. Lanier Simmons
                          Dr. Clarence H. Webb




This public document was published at an annual cost of $.30 per copy by
Division of Administration, Administrative Services, P.O. Box 44095,
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 70804 to make available to the citizens of
Louisiana through publication information about prehistoric and historic
archaeology under authority of La. R.S. 41:1601-1613. This material was
printed in accordance with the standards for printing by state agencies
established pursuant to RS. 43:31.




                     PRESERVING LOUISIANA’S LEGACY:
                           Everyone Can Help


                            Nancy W. Hawkins
                        Division of Archaeology




                             Editor’s Note


Louisiana’s cultural heritage dates back to approximately 10,000 B.C.
when Paleo-Indian hunters entered the region in search of Pleistocene
big game. Since that time, many other groups have settled in the area.
Each of these groups has left evidence of its presence in the
archaeological record. The Anthropological Study series published by the
Department of Culture, Recreation & Tourism provides a readable account
of various activities of these cultural groups.

Nancy Hawkins, outreach coordinator for the Division of Archaeology, is
the author of _Preserving Louisiana’s Legacy_, the fifth volume in the
Anthropological Study series. This volume departs somewhat from the
previous ones in the series in that it does not describe a particular
group of people or archaeological sites. Rather it addresses
archaeological preservation as a whole. In this volume Ms. Hawkins
explains in general terms how an archaeologist studies the past, what
factors affect the preservation of archaeological remains, and how
government, industry, business, landowners, and other groups and
individuals can contribute to the preservation of Louisiana’s
archaeological heritage.

We are pleased to be able to make _Preserving Louisiana’s Legacy_
available and trust that the reader will enjoy this volume.

                                                           Kathleen Byrd
                                                   _State Archaeologist_

    [Illustration: Letter]

                           STATE OF LOUISIANA
             DEPARTMENT OF CULTURE, RECREATION AND TOURISM
                     OFFICE OF PROGRAM DEVELOPMENT

                             DAVID C. TREEN
                           Governor Assistant
                           ROBERT B. DeBLIEUX
                               Secretary
                          MRS. LAWRENCE H. FOX
                               Secretary

April 20, 1982

CITIZENS OF LOUISIANA

As Louisiana’s State Historic Preservation Officer, I am pleased to introduce
Preserving Louisiana’s Legacy, the fifth volume in the Anthropological
Study series of the Department of Culture, Recreation & Tourism and the
Louisiana Archaeological Survey & Antiquities Commission.

Through my work first in private business and more recently in local and
state government, I have become increasingly impressed with the diversity
and uniqueness of Louisiana’s archaeological remains. There is no question
that many of these archaeological sites should be preserved for the future.
They are Louisiana’s past.

Louisiana has some of the most important sites in the United States. In
fact, one prehistoric archaeological site, Poverty Point in West Carroll
Parish, has been suggested for nomination to the World Heritage List.
This program, in which 45 nations participate, recognizes areas of outstanding
universal value to mankind.

I am proud to live in a state with such a rich archaeological heritage,
and I hope that it can be protected for future generations. However, no
one individual or group working alone can preserve Louisiana’s legacy.
Only through the concerted efforts of government, industry, business, and
individuals can this be accomplished. This volume suggests what you can
do to preserve Louisiana’s archaeological sites. I hope you enjoy this
booklet.

Sincerely,

_Rob DeBlieux_

ROBERT B. DEBLIEUX
STATE HISTORIC PRESERVATION OFFICER

       P. O. Box 44247    Baton Rouge, La. 70804    504-342-6682




                            ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS


Illustrations for this booklet have been generously contributed by
several people. Robert Neuman, Louisiana State University, provided
photographs of Monk’s Mound (cover), a projectile point (p. 1), a vessel
from the Clarence H. Webb Collection (p. 2), a shell midden (p. 2), and
of excavation pits (p. 15). Debbie Woodiel, State Parks, gave permission
to use an illustration from her thesis (p. 5). The American Museum of
Natural History permitted reproduction of the Poverty Point site map (p.
1), and New Orleans East provided the illustration on page 13. All other
photographs are from the files at the Division of Archaeology, and have
been taken by staff archaeologists through the years.




                        ARCHAEOLOGY IN LOUISIANA


People lived in Louisiana thousands of years before the first Europeans
sailed to the New World. Because of archaeology, the history of even
these early Indians is now being described and understood. All people
leave traces of their activities wherever they cook, build houses, hold
religious ceremonies, make tools, or dump their trash. If these traces
are undisturbed, archaeologists can use them to determine who left them,
when they were left, and what activities were associated with them.
These are a few of the things archaeologists have learned about
Louisiana:

    [Illustration: Although many people refer to all stone points as
    arrowheads, Indians actually made projectile points for over 10,000
    years before they ever used one on an arrow. The point pictured here
    would have been used on a spear and could have killed a prehistoric
    elephant, called a mastodon.]

    [Illustration: In northeastern Louisiana by 1000 B.C., Indians had
    built rows of earthen ridges three-quarters of a mile across. As far
    as we know, they are the earliest earthworks of their size in North
    America. Some archaeologists think they were constructed as an
    astronomical observatory because two gaps in the ridges line up with
    the winter and summer solstice sunsets.]

    [Illustration: Contrary to present day practice, prehistoric
    Louisianians preferred marsh clams over crawfish and crabs. They ate
    so many clams that large piles of shells can still be found in the
    marshes. Over time, the shells have become compressed, and now some
    piles are almost rock hard.]

    [Illustration: Indians in Louisiana made beautiful and elaborate
    pottery without ever using a potter’s wheel. This delicate water
    bottle was made in northwestern Louisiana about A.D. 1400.]

    [Illustration: European missionaries and explorers who traveled in
    Louisiana in the 1600s and 1700s depended on experienced Indian
    traders to supply them with food, animal skins, salt, and horses. In
    exchange, Europeans gave the Indians beads, crucifixes, guns, metal
    pots, knives, and bells like these.]




                 HOW AN ARCHAEOLOGIST STUDIES THE PAST


Although an archaeologist can gain some information from artifacts that
have been removed from a site, much more information can be gleaned
through careful survey and excavation. During a survey, the
archaeologist examines artifacts remaining on the ground and records
large concentrations as sites. The archaeologist evaluates each site’s
size and age, and determines how it contributes to an overall
understanding of Louisiana’s past.

No two sites exactly duplicate each other, but some are more unusual
than others. Some provide new or important information linking a group
of people with a certain location or activity for the first time. This
means that sometimes a small site, without elaborate or especially
beautiful artifacts, may be more important to the understanding of the
past than another site that is larger. An archaeologist who records an
important site will recommend protection or excavation for it.

The archaeologist will evaluate threats to the site to determine the
possibility of preserving the site intact. Some sites must be protected
to insure that future generations can see unexcavated sites, and so that
future archaeologists with improved techniques will have sites left to
study. Even if an archaeologist excavates a site, he or she will usually
leave parts of it untouched.

Archaeological excavation of a site is meticulous in order to preserve
every piece of information. The archaeologist photographs and draws soil
changes and artifacts as they are uncovered. This provides a permanent
record of the relationships of materials to each other and to other
parts of the site. Samples of charcoal, soil, bones, and decayed plants
are collected for laboratory analysis.

Long months of study and interpretation follow excavations as the
archaeologist and technicians piece together the many bits of
information. Laboratory analysis may indicate what people ate, what
plants were growing around the site, and perhaps even the date the site
was used. Study of the artifacts may tell how the site was used, who
used it, and whether they were trading with other groups.

Relationships of the remains show what parts of the site were used for
butchering game, cooking food, making tools, gardening, building houses,
burying the dead, and conducting ceremonial activities. Artifact
relationships may tell whether men and women worked in different areas,
and whether the site was used repeatedly through the years. An
archaeologist may even be able to discover very detailed information
like whether the people cooked their fish whole or in fillets, what
strains of corn they grew, and what kind of wood they used to build
their houses. This detailed understanding can result only from careful
study of a well-preserved site.

The archaeological sites of Louisiana span the time from the arrival of
the earliest inhabitants, approximately 12,000 years ago, to the 20th
century. These sites are as important in understanding Louisiana’s past
as original journals from early explorers. Each is a unique description
of the land and people from years past. Just as a journal with all its
pages tells more than a single page out of context, a complete site
tells many times more than artifacts on a shelf or a site half-destroyed
by modern-day construction activities.

    [Illustration: Excavation of a mound site in Iberville Parish was
    meticulous in order to record the relationships of materials and to
    collect remains for laboratory analysis (above). Archaeologists were
    able to determine that under the mound was a circular house built of
    cypress and ash poles that were covered with thatch (right). Inside
    were interior support posts and wooden furniture such as beds or
    racks, as well as a central fire hearth and four smaller fire pits.
    Honey locust seeds, persimmon seeds and bones from four kinds of
    fish indicate some of the things these prehistoric people ate.
    Radiocarbon dates show that the structure was being used at A. D.
    1000.]

Everyone in Louisiana has the right to know about the state’s legacy.
The complete history of Louisiana can be recorded only through careful,
detailed excavation by individuals especially trained in archaeological
techniques. If a site is destroyed before it can be evaluated, that
information is lost forever; it is irreplaceable. Unfortunately, sites
are destroyed every day in Louisiana, both accidentally and
intentionally.

    [Illustration: 16 lv 128
    PLAN VIEW OF FEATURE THREE, LEVEL FOUR]

  Wall Trench
  Embankment
  Ramp
  Post
  Fire Hearth




                   MAJOR IMPACTS ON SITE PRESERVATION


Throughout history, the traces of people who lived before have been
altered by those who followed. Even when Indians camped in places where
their ancestors had camped, they destroyed a piece of the record of
their past. In contrast with this age-old pattern of minor alterations,
however, is the potentially devastating impact of modern-day technology.
In Louisiana today, major types of land modification include energy
exploration and development, timber cutting, agriculture, urban
expansion, waterway modification, and transportation network
construction. These are all likely to disturb archaeological sites if
they are conducted without care.

    [Illustration: Heavy machinery can destroy a site in minutes.]

The country’s need for oil, gas, coal, and timber has accelerated the
search for these products in the past decade. As exploration crews cut
roads into otherwise inaccessible areas, previously undetected sites are
exposed and disturbed. When heavy machinery is brought in to begin
logging, drilling, or mining, sites can be gouged or crushed in a few
seconds. Unless the crews are alert, fragile archaeological sites are
destroyed before they are even recorded. In Louisiana’s coastal areas,
oil and gas production has also affected sites. Pipelines are often laid
through piles of shells because they are more stable than the
surrounding land. Unfortunately, a great many of these piles are
man-made; they are actually archaeological sites.

Mechanized agriculture affects sites when plows turn up artifacts,
jumbling the materials. Whenever an area is cultivated for the first
time, sites may be found. In Louisiana, previously undisturbed areas
within the river valleys are now being cleared for large-scale
agriculture. Many buried prehistoric sites along old river channels
could be destroyed. Sites in cultivated fields may be damaged further if
they are plowed more deeply than in the past. Modern subsoilers can cut
three feet into the ground, disturbing even deeply buried materials.

    [Illustration: This gas pipeline in southeastern Louisiana’s marsh
    was laid directly through an archaeological site.]

Farmers often regard Indian mounds as troublesome when they occur in
areas otherwise ideal for plowing. If farmers do not recognize the value
of these mounds, they may have them removed. For example, a man in
Madison Parish sold the dirt from a large Indian mound on his land for
road fill. The ancient monument was removed so the land could be planted
with soybeans.

    [Illustration: Dirt from this mound in Madison Parish was used for a
    road foundation ...]

Population growth in Louisiana has led to rapidly expanding cities and
extended transportation networks. Modern cities are often in the same
places that Indians and early Europeans built their settlements, so city
growth is almost certain to disturb archaeological sites. As early as
the turn of the century, archaeologists were charting the destruction of
a mound group in eastern Louisiana. A city was growing up around one of
the largest groups of mounds in the Southeastern United States. In 1931,
an archaeologist wrote about the leveling of one of the mounds, a square
multi-stage one, 80 feet tall and 180 feet on each side. The dirt was
used to build the approach ramps for a bridge. Today, part of only one
mound remains, protected because of the recent cemetery on top.

    [Illustration: leaving behind only a few clumps of trees.]

The destruction mentioned above has resulted from a lack of
understanding of the importance of these sites. It has taken
Louisianians a long time to realize the uniqueness and richness of their
state’s cultural heritage. While many people are now joining in the
efforts to conserve the remaining sites, a few continue to willfully
destroy them.

Some individuals dig into sites in order to find artifacts that can be
sold to antiquity dealers. These looters have demolished entire Indian
villages, stealing the story of those sites from all Louisianians. Even
if the artifacts are eventually turned over to an archaeologist, most of
the information has been obliterated. Lost are the records of where the
artifacts originally came from, the relationships of the artifacts to
each other, the samples of materials for laboratory analysis, and
usually the ordinary or broken artifacts that tell the archaeologist
much, but sell for little.

    [Illustration: Looters at this archaeological site found artifacts,
    but destroyed all the other information archaeologists could have
    used to interpret the site.]

    [Illustration: Damaged site]




                            GOVERNMENT HELPS


Although countless sites have been destroyed in Louisiana, many other
sites have been saved by concerned individuals, companies, and
organizations.

Our legislators have been interested enough in Louisiana’s heritage to
draft laws that help protect sites. Without a permit, it is now illegal
to dig into, alter, or take anything from a site on state or federal
land. Recent legislation calls for strict fines or jail sentences for
people collecting materials from federal lands.

Our laws also help protect sites from those land alteration projects
that in the past destroyed so many sites. The locations of proposed
projects are now checked against archaeological records to be sure that
no known sites will be affected. If the project is a large one, or if
the area appears likely to have sites, an archaeological investigation
will be recommended to determine whether sites are in the area.

Because of this process, approximately 400 previously undocumented sites
are now recorded and evaluated by archaeologists in Louisiana each year.
This has resulted in a more complete record of Louisiana’s
archaeological sites and a decrease in the rate of site destruction by
industry. It has also encouraged developers to think about the care of
our past early in the planning stages of their projects.

Both federal and state governments protect archaeological sites as parks
that the public can visit. In Louisiana, the National Park Service has
included the Big Oak Island site near New Orleans as part of Jean
Lafitte National Historical Park. This site dates from the time of
Christ and was seasonally used for shellfish collecting and processing.
The Louisiana Office of State Parks also maintains two prehistoric
archaeological sites that are open to the public and that have
interpretive museums. One is Poverty Point Commemorative Area where the
state’s largest prehistoric earthworks were built 3,000 years ago, and
the other is Marksville State Commemorative Area where Indians built
mounds approximately 2,000 years ago. Archaeological investigations have
also been conducted at many of the commemorative areas associated with
18th, 19th, and 20th century history. These parks give people a chance
to learn more about archaeology and how it contributes to an
understanding of our state’s past.




                       BUSINESS AND INDUSTRY HELP


Businesses and industries are most likely to deal with archaeological
sites when they plan projects on publicly-owned lands or when projects
require permits. Many developers are sensitive to the need for
preservation of important sites and plan ahead for evaluation of the
project’s impact on these. Businesses and industries whose projects will
affect sites are proving to be creative in their responses. Sometimes, a
minor change, like moving a road 25 feet to one side, may prevent a site
from being destroyed.

Businesses also participate in archaeology because of curiosity about
sites on their land. Some have provided food and lodging for excavators
or have given grants to archaeologists to fund field and lab work. After
analysis is completed, these companies have either donated artifacts to
a museum or have developed small displays for their employees.

Companies are discovering that becoming involved with archaeology can
have tax advantages. If a company donates land with a site on it to a
nonprofit or governmental organization, the donation can be claimed as a
tax deduction. A company also can receive a tax benefit by sponsoring
excavation of a site either on or off its property. One southern
Louisiana company funded 25% of the cost of an excavation and counted
that as a tax deduction. The company owned the land with the site, so by
donating the artifacts, it also could claim their worth as a tax
deduction.

A New Orleans development corporation planned a massive project with an
extremely important site in mind. The company leased land with a site on
it to the Jean Lafitte National Historical Park for $1.00 a year. Rather
than viewing the site as a liability, however, the company saw it as an
asset. Through the lease of the site, the corporation generated positive
community feelings, protected a part of our cultural heritage, and
enhanced the value of the surrounding property. The benefits to the
community and to the corporation will continue into the future.

A Baton Rouge company also was able to use archaeology in public
relations. It developed an outstanding display about prehistoric
Louisiana for the lobby of its main building. The exhibit attracts
visitors and promotes interest not only in archaeology, but also in the
company’s services.

    [Illustration: One New Orleans developer is protecting a major site
    and is advertising its decision.]




                              IN BUILDING
                           NEW ORLEANS EAST,
                      SOME THINGS ARE MORE SACRED
                       THAN THE ALMIGHTY DOLLAR.

  Once, New Orleans was rich in hidden archeological treasures. Over 600
  prehistoric sites were buried throughout the city, but almost all of
  them have been destroyed in the name of progress. One of the most
  valuable sites, however, has miraculously survived the city’s
  development: a prehistoric village of the Tchefuncte Indian Tribe,
  dating back to 500 BC. It’s called Big Oak Island and it’s located in
  New Orleans East.

  In order to preserve this part of our city’s heritage, New Orleans
  East has leased this 12-acre site, right in the heart of our
  community, to the Jean Lafitte National Historical Park. The cost: one
  dollar a year.

  Donating this valuable piece of land to the Park Service is just one
  example of what makes us different from other developers. Throughout
  New Orleans East, we’re leaving additional areas untouched as well, so
  that in the future, residents here will have trees to enjoy, birds to
  watch, and parks to play in. We’re doing all this because we want New
  Orleans East to be a community that everyone in New Orleans can be
  proud of.

  Building a community with this kind of concern for the environment may
  not be the most profitable development plan, but, like the treasures
  of Oak Island, it may very well be priceless in the years to come.




                        PRIVATE LANDOWNERS HELP


People who have archaeological sites on their land have many ways of
protecting the sites. A site covered by natural vegetation usually is
camouflaged and has limited access. As long as the owner does not clear
the land, disturbance to the site will be minimized. A site already in a
cultivated field probably will not suffer significantly from continued
plowing at the same depth. Although initial plowing altered artifact
relationships in the plow zone, the materials beneath remain well
protected.

A landowner who is interested in protecting a site may want to have it
recognized by placing it on the Registry of State Cultural Resource
Landmarks. The Registry is established as an authoritative guide to the
state’s most important archaeological sites. Once a site is placed on
the Registry, there is an agreement between the owner and the State of
Louisiana to help protect it. This process ensures that important sites
will be recognized, preserved, and protected to the maximum extent
possible.

    [Illustration: The site in this soybean field has already been
    disturbed, but probably will not suffer significantly if plowing is
    continued at the same depth.]

    [Illustration: Landowners who finance excavations can receive
    substantial tax benefits.]

A landowner who is unable to protect a site because of plans to plow
deeper, cultivate an unplowed area, or do construction, should alert the
Division of Archaeology. If he gives enough advance warning, an
archaeologist may be able to evaluate the site before the changes begin.

Recently, the tax advantages available to site owners have been
clarified. One landowner paid half of the excavation cost at a site on
his land and claimed his cost as a tax deduction. Later, he donated the
artifacts from the site and also deducted their worth, equivalent to the
entire cost of the excavation.

Federal tax incentives also apply to the gift of an important
archaeological site to a governmental or nonprofit organization. This
donation can be either an outright gift or an easement (in which the
owner gives up certain control of the land, but retains ownership). In
either case, the transaction qualifies as a charitable contribution for
federal income tax, estate tax, and gift tax purposes.




                              YOU CAN HELP


Most archaeological sites are first discovered not by professional
archaeologists, but by ordinary people who live or work near the sites.
Usually these people do not know how to report a site to the proper
authorities. If you find a site, you can help protect Louisiana’s
heritage by letting archaeologists know about it. The Division of
Archaeology has prepared a form especially for you to use, and one is in
the center of this booklet.

    [Illustration: The first step in recording a site is plotting its
    location on a U.S.G.S. topographic quad or other accurate map.]

You should fill out the form as completely as possible, without
attempting to dig in the site. Mark its location on a map, and
photograph the site area. Try to draw the artifacts you see; you don’t
need to be an artist, just trace around them on a piece of paper and
sketch in any designs. If you find artifacts in a protected area where
they are not being disturbed, it is best not to collect them; they may
tell an archaeologist a great deal if they are left in place. If,
however, you do collect something from the site, be sure to store it
carefully with information about exactly where you found it.

Please mail the form, map, photographs, and drawings to the Division of
Archaeology. Your information will be carefully reviewed, and added to
the permanent file stored in Baton Rouge. A staff archaeologist will
write a letter, telling you if the site has been assigned an official
state number, and possibly asking for more information. By reporting a
site, you will be helping to record the history of the state.

If you want to learn more about Louisiana archaeology, you can enroll in
a class at a local university, visit museums, read archaeology books, or
tour one of the state archaeological commemorative areas.

You may also want to join the Louisiana Archaeological Society (LAS).
The Society’s chapters throughout the state have monthly meetings with
programs discussing local and state-wide archaeology. The LAS publishes
a quarterly newsletter with information about current research, and an
annual bulletin with in-depth reports. Often the LAS chapters also are
involved in archaeological survey or excavation. The organization’s
members are both professional and avocational archaeologists who come
together to advance Louisiana archaeology.

You will also find other opportunities to help protect Louisiana’s
heritage throughout the year. You can encourage your elected officials
to support legislation protecting sites. You can help friends record and
preserve sites on their land. Most importantly, you can explain to
others the importance of archaeological sites, and the reasons for
preserving them. By doing these things, you will be working with
concerned people throughout the state to preserve Louisiana’s legacy for
the future.




  Your Name ______________________________

  Your Address
  ______________________________
  ______________________________

  Your Telephone Number ______________________________

  Date ______________________________

  Additional Comments:
  ______________________________
  ______________________________
  ______________________________
  ______________________________




                          Please mail this to:

                        Division of Archaeology
                            P. O. Box 44247
                         Baton Rouge, LA 70804

  Site Name ______________________________
  Parish ______________________________

  Instructions for Reaching Site from Nearest Major Road
  ______________________________
  ______________________________

  Owner’s Name ______________________________
  Owner’s Address
  ______________________________
  ______________________________

  Tenant’s Name ______________________________
  Tenant’s Address
  ______________________________
  ______________________________

  Characteristics of Site:
    [_] mound(s),
    [_] scatter of artifacts,
    [_] shell heap(s),
    [_] old building(s),
    [_] other ______________________________

  General Site Description
  ______________________________

  Site Size ______________________________

  Kinds of Artifacts:
    [_] projectile points (arrowheads),
    [_] stone chips,
    [_] Indian pottery pieces,
    [_] bones,
    [_] shells,
    [_] beads,
    [_] pieces of old dishes,
    [_] old bottles,
    [_] other ______________________________

  Estimated Number of Artifacts ______________________________

  Present Use of Land ______________________________

  Type of Erosion, Development, or Other Site Disturbance
  ______________________________
  ______________________________

  People Who Have Collections from the Site:

  Name ______________________________
  Address
  ______________________________

  Name ______________________________
  Address
  ______________________________




IF POSSIBLE, PLEASE ACCOMPANY THIS FORM WITH A ROAD MAP WITH THE SITE
MARKED, PHOTOGRAPHS OF THE SITE, AND SKETCHES OF REPRESENTATIVE
ARTIFACTS.




                      Anthropological Study Series


                       No. 1 On the Tunica Trail
                          by Jeffrey P. Brain

          No. 2 The Caddo Indians of Louisiana, second edition
                 by Clarence H. Webb & Hiram F. Gregory

      No. 3 The Role of Salt in Eastern North American Prehistory
                              by Ian Brown

                        No. 4 El Nuevo Constante
                     by Charles E. Pearson, et al.

                  No. 5 Preserving Louisiana’s Legacy
                          by Nancy W. Hawkins

                       No. 6 Louisiana Prehistory
                 by Robert W. Neuman & Nancy W. Hawkins

                          No. 7 Poverty Point
                            by Jon L. Gibson

                           No. 8 Bailey’s Dam
             by Steven D. Smith and George J. Castille III

             These publications can be obtained by writing:

                        Division of Archaeology
                            P. O. Box 44247
                         Baton Rouge, LA 70804




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Silently corrected a few typos.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is a government public document, and can be freely copied and
  distributed.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.







End of Project Gutenberg's Preserving Louisiana's Legacy, by Nancy W. Dawkins

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PRESERVING LOUISIANA'S LEGACY ***

***** This file should be named 62235-0.txt or 62235-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/2/2/3/62235/

Produced by Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

